README.md, before:

# Waypoint

## Overview

Waypoint is an iOS navigation app that combines the simplicity of a compass interface with destination-based navigation. Instead of traditional turn-by-turn directions, Waypoint shows you a compass with a waypoint indicator pointing toward your destination, giving you a natural, intuitive sense of direction and distance.

To be released in iOS App Store in near future.

### Key Features

- **Compass Navigation**: Real-time compass view with a waypoint pin showing the direction to your destination
- **Map View**: Toggle to a traditional Google Maps view showing both your current location and destination
- **Smart Search**: Google Places autocomplete for finding destinations quickly
- **Haptic Feedback**: Feel when you're aligned with your destination (within 20° of target bearing)
- **Location Details**: Current location info including coordinates, heading, elevation, and address
- **Recent Destinations**: Quick access to your last 5 searched destinations

### How It Works

1. Set a destination using the search bar on the map view
2. Switch to compass view to see a waypoint indicator showing the direction to your destination
3. As you move or rotate your device, the compass updates in real-time
4. The waypoint pin rotates around the compass ring to always point toward your destination
5. Haptic feedback activates when you're within 20° of the target bearing

---

## Technical Details

### Tech Stack

- **SwiftUI**: Modern declarative UI framework
- **Core Location**: GPS positioning, compass heading, and location services
- **Google Maps SDK**: Interactive map integration
- **Google Places API**: Autocomplete search and place details
- **Core Haptics**: Haptic feedback engine
- **Combine**: Reactive programming for state management

### System Architecture

Waypoint follows a clean architecture pattern with clear separation of concerns:

```
Waypoint/
├── Models/          # Data structures
├── Services/        # Business logic and external APIs
├── Views/           # UI components
└── Utils/           # Reusable utilities
```

### File Structure

```
Waypoint/
├── WaypointApp.swift          # App entry point, initializes Google Maps SDK
├── Models/
│   ├── CurrentLocation.swift
│   └── Destination.swift
├── Services/
│   ├── LocationManager.swift
│   ├── PlacesService.swift
│   └── HapticService.swift
├── Views/
│   ├── ContentView.swift
│   ├── CompassView.swift
│   ├── MapView.swift
│   └── SearchBar.swift
├── Utils/
│   └── CompassDrawing.swift
├── Config.plist               # Google Maps API key (not in repo)
└── Assets.xcassets/           # App icons and assets
```

#### Models

Models are simple data structures that represent the core entities in the app. They contain no business logic—just properties and basic initialization.

**`CurrentLocation.swift`**
- Stores current GPS position, compass heading, reverse-geocoded address, and elevation
- Simple data container with no business logic

**`Destination.swift`**
- Stores selected destination with address, display name, and coordinates
- Implements `Codable` for persistence (recent destinations)
- Extracts display name from full address for cleaner UI

#### Services

Services contain the business logic and handle interactions with external systems (APIs, device sensors, etc.). They manage state and provide functionality used by the views.

**`LocationManager.swift`**
- Central service managing all location-related functionality
- Handles GPS updates, compass heading, and location permissions
- Calculates bearing and distance to destination using spherical trigonometry
- Reverse geocodes coordinates to human-readable addresses
- Manages recent destinations persistence via UserDefaults
- Integrates with `HapticService` for alignment feedback
- Publishes updates via `@Published` properties for reactive UI updates

**`PlacesService.swift`**
- Manages Google Places API integration
- Handles autocomplete search queries
- Fetches place details and converts to `Destination` objects

**`HapticService.swift`**
- Core Haptics engine for tactile feedback
- Provides intensity-based haptic feedback when within 20° of target bearing
- Intensity increases as alignment improves (stronger feedback when closer to center)
- Manages haptic engine lifecycle and state

#### Views

Views are SwiftUI components that define the user interface. They observe data from services and models, display information to users, and handle user interactions.

**`ContentView.swift`**
- Root view container
- Manages toggle between compass and map views
- Creates and owns the `LocationManager` instance via `@StateObject`

**`CompassView.swift`**
- Main compass interface
- Displays destination info at top, compass in middle, current location at bottom
- Formats coordinates (degrees/minutes/seconds), distance (miles/meters), and heading direction
- Shows alignment error indicator when destination is set

**`MapView.swift`**
- Google Maps integration using `UIViewRepresentable` (bridges UIKit to SwiftUI)
- Displays current location and destination markers
- Includes search bar overlay for finding destinations
- Manages map camera position and marker updates

**`SearchBar.swift`**
- Address search interface with autocomplete dropdown
- Shows Google Places suggestions while typing
- Displays recent destinations when search field is focused but empty
- Handles place selection and updates `LocationManager`

#### Utils

**`CompassDrawing.swift`**
- Custom SwiftUI components for compass visualization:
  - `CompassRing`: Circular compass with degree markings and cardinal directions
  - `CompassNeedle`: Red triangle pointing north, rotates with device heading
  - `DestinationPin`: Google Maps-style pin showing destination bearing
  - `Triangle`: Custom shape used for needle and pin graphics

### Key Technical Concepts

**Navigation Math**
- Uses spherical trigonometry (`atan2`) to calculate bearing between two GPS coordinates
- Bearing calculation accounts for Earth's curvature for accurate long-distance navigation
- Distance calculated using `CLLocation.distance(from:)` and converted to miles

**Coordinate Formatting**
- Converts decimal degrees to degrees/minutes/seconds format for display
- Handles cardinal directions (N/S/E/W) based on sign

**Haptic Feedback Algorithm**
- Activates within ±20° zone around target bearing
- Intensity: 0.1 (at boundary) to 1.0 (perfectly aligned)
- Sharpness: 0.8 (at boundary) to 0.0 (at center)
- Provides immediate feedback on each alignment update

**State Management**
- Uses SwiftUI's reactive data flow with `@Published`, `@StateObject`, and `@ObservedObject`
- `LocationManager` is the single source of truth for location and destination state
- Services publish updates that automatically trigger UI refreshes

**State Variables and Storage**

**LocationManager (Session State - `@Published`)**
- `currentLocation`: Current GPS position, heading, address, and elevation
- `destination`: Selected destination for navigation
- `searchText`: Current search bar input text
- `isSearchBarFocused`: Whether the search bar is currently focused
- `recentDestinations`: Array of last 5 searched destinations
- `bearingToDestination`: Calculated bearing angle to destination (0-360°)
- `distanceToDestination`: Distance to destination in miles
- `alignmentError`: Signed alignment error (+ = right of target, - = left)

**LocationManager (Session State - Non-Published)**
- `savedMapCamera`: Saved map camera position (lat, lng, zoom) for restoring map view state
- Persists across view recreations when switching between compass and map views
- Saved continuously as user pans/zooms the map via `GMSMapViewDelegate`

**LocationManager (Persistent State - UserDefaults)**
- `recentDestinations`: Saved to UserDefaults as JSON
- Automatically saved via `didSet` when array changes
- Loaded on app startup in `init()`
- Key: `"recentDestinations"`

**PlacesService (Session State)**
- `searchResults`: Array of Google Places autocomplete predictions

**View-Level State (`@State`)**
- `ContentView.showingMapView`: Boolean flag for compass/map view toggle
- `MapView.GoogleMapView.mapView`: Reference to the GMSMapView instance
- `MapView.GoogleMapView.hasSetInitialCamera`: Flag to prevent overwriting saved camera
- `SearchBar.isSearching`: Whether user is actively searching
- `SearchBar.isTextFieldFocused`: TextField focus state

**Persistence Strategy**
- **Persistent (survives app restarts)**: Recent destinations → UserDefaults
- **Session (survives view recreation)**: Map camera, navigation state → LocationManager properties
- **Local (view lifecycle)**: UI state, temporary flags → `@State` in views

### Configuration

The app requires a Google Maps API key stored in `Config.plist`:

```xml
<key>GMSApiKey</key>
<string>YOUR_API_KEY_HERE</string>
```

This key is used for both Google Maps and Google Places services.

### Permissions

The app requires the following iOS permissions:
- **Location Services (When In Use)**: For GPS positioning and compass heading

---

## Development Notes

### Architecture Principles

- **Separation of Concerns**: Models hold data, Services handle logic, Views display UI
- **Single Source of Truth**: `LocationManager` manages all location-related state
- **Reactive Updates**: SwiftUI automatically updates UI when `@Published` properties change
- **Minimal Dependencies**: Core iOS frameworks + Google Maps SDK only

### Future Enhancements

Potential areas for expansion:
- Path-tracking and storing, to see your travels in hindsight
- Pulses on waypoint placement for enhanced immersion and synchronization between digital map, hapto-visual feedback, and real-world placement

---

Commit message:

images readme, demo video too

README.md, after:

# Waypoint

## Overview

Waypoint is an iOS navigation app that combines the simplicity of a compass interface with destination-based navigation. Instead of traditional turn-by-turn directions, Waypoint shows you a compass with a waypoint indicator pointing toward your destination, giving you a natural, intuitive sense of direction and distance.

To be released in iOS App Store in near future.

<img src="WaypointCovers/IMG_1576.jpg" width="200" /> <img src="WaypointCovers/IMG_1577.jpg" width="200" /> <img src="WaypointCovers/IMG_1578.jpg" width="200" /> <img src="WaypointCovers/IMG_1579.jpg" width="200" /> <img src="WaypointCovers/IMG_1580.jpg" width="200" />

To be released in iOS App Store in near future.

## Demo Video

[Watch Demo Video](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/ddlQDdIzPeY)

### Key Features

- **Compass Navigation**: Real-time compass view with a waypoint pin showing the direction to your destination
- **Map View**: Toggle to a traditional Google Maps view showing both your current location and destination
- **Smart Search**: Google Places autocomplete for finding destinations quickly
- **Haptic Feedback**: Feel when you're aligned with your destination (within 20° of target bearing)
- **Location Details**: Current location info including coordinates, heading, elevation, and address
- **Recent Destinations**: Quick access to your last 5 searched destinations

### How It Works

1. Set a destination using the search bar on the map view
2. Switch to compass view to see a waypoint indicator showing the direction to your destination
3. As you move or rotate your device, the compass updates in real-time
4. The waypoint pin rotates around the compass ring to always point toward your destination
5. Haptic feedback activates when you're within 20° of the target bearing

---

## Technical Details

### Tech Stack

- **SwiftUI**: Modern declarative UI framework
- **Core Location**: GPS positioning, compass heading, and location services
- **Google Maps SDK**: Interactive map integration
- **Google Places API**: Autocomplete search and place details
- **Core Haptics**: Haptic feedback engine
- **Combine**: Reactive programming for state management

### System Architecture

Waypoint follows a clean architecture pattern with clear separation of concerns:

```
Waypoint/
├── Models/          # Data structures
├── Services/        # Business logic and external APIs
├── Views/           # UI components
└── Utils/           # Reusable utilities
```

### File Structure

```
Waypoint/
├── WaypointApp.swift          # App entry point, initializes Google Maps SDK
├── Models/
│   ├── CurrentLocation.swift
│   └── Destination.swift
├── Services/
│   ├── LocationManager.swift
│   ├── PlacesService.swift
│   └── HapticService.swift
├── Views/
│   ├── ContentView.swift
│   ├── CompassView.swift
│   ├── MapView.swift
│   └── SearchBar.swift
├── Utils/
│   └── CompassDrawing.swift
├── Config.plist               # Google Maps API key (not in repo)
└── Assets.xcassets/           # App icons and assets
```

#### Models

Models are simple data structures that represent the core entities in the app. They contain no business logic—just properties and basic initialization.

**`CurrentLocation.swift`**
- Stores current GPS position, compass heading, reverse-geocoded address, and elevation
- Simple data container with no business logic

**`Destination.swift`**
- Stores selected destination with address, display name, and coordinates
- Implements `Codable` for persistence (recent destinations)
- Extracts display name from full address for cleaner UI

#### Services

Services contain the business logic and handle interactions with external systems (APIs, device sensors, etc.). They manage state and provide functionality used by the views.

**`LocationManager.swift`**
- Central service managing all location-related functionality
- Handles GPS updates, compass heading, and location permissions
- Calculates bearing and distance to destination using spherical trigonometry
- Reverse geocodes coordinates to human-readable addresses
- Manages recent destinations persistence via UserDefaults
- Integrates with `HapticService` for alignment feedback
- Publishes updates via `@Published` properties for reactive UI updates

**`PlacesService.swift`**
- Manages Google Places API integration
- Handles autocomplete search queries
- Fetches place details and converts to `Destination` objects

**`HapticService.swift`**
- Core Haptics engine for tactile feedback
- Provides intensity-based haptic feedback when within 20° of target bearing
- Intensity increases as alignment improves (stronger feedback when closer to center)
- Manages haptic engine lifecycle and state

#### Views

Views are SwiftUI components that define the user interface. They observe data from services and models, display information to users, and handle user interactions.

**`ContentView.swift`**
- Root view container
- Manages toggle between compass and map views
- Creates and owns the `LocationManager` instance via `@StateObject`

**`CompassView.swift`**
- Main compass interface
- Displays destination info at top, compass in middle, current location at bottom
- Formats coordinates (degrees/minutes/seconds), distance (miles/meters), and heading direction
- Shows alignment error indicator when destination is set

**`MapView.swift`**
- Google Maps integration using `UIViewRepresentable` (bridges UIKit to SwiftUI)
- Displays current location and destination markers
- Includes search bar overlay for finding destinations
- Manages map camera position and marker updates

**`SearchBar.swift`**
- Address search interface with autocomplete dropdown
- Shows Google Places suggestions while typing
- Displays recent destinations when search field is focused but empty
- Handles place selection and updates `LocationManager`

#### Utils

**`CompassDrawing.swift`**
- Custom SwiftUI components for compass visualization:
  - `CompassRing`: Circular compass with degree markings and cardinal directions
  - `CompassNeedle`: Red triangle pointing north, rotates with device heading
  - `DestinationPin`: Google Maps-style pin showing destination bearing
  - `Triangle`: Custom shape used for needle and pin graphics

### Key Technical Concepts

**Navigation Math**
- Uses spherical trigonometry (`atan2`) to calculate bearing between two GPS coordinates
- Bearing calculation accounts for Earth's curvature for accurate long-distance navigation
- Distance calculated using `CLLocation.distance(from:)` and converted to miles

**Coordinate Formatting**
- Converts decimal degrees to degrees/minutes/seconds format for display
- Handles cardinal directions (N/S/E/W) based on sign

**Haptic Feedback Algorithm**
- Activates within ±20° zone around target bearing
- Intensity: 0.1 (at boundary) to 1.0 (perfectly aligned)
- Sharpness: 0.8 (at boundary) to 0.0 (at center)
- Provides immediate feedback on each alignment update

**State Management**
- Uses SwiftUI's reactive data flow with `@Published`, `@StateObject`, and `@ObservedObject`
- `LocationManager` is the single source of truth for location and destination state
- Services publish updates that automatically trigger UI refreshes

**State Variables and Storage**

**LocationManager (Session State - `@Published`)**
- `currentLocation`: Current GPS position, heading, address, and elevation
- `destination`: Selected destination for navigation
- `searchText`: Current search bar input text
- `isSearchBarFocused`: Whether the search bar is currently focused
- `recentDestinations`: Array of last 5 searched destinations
- `bearingToDestination`: Calculated bearing angle to destination (0-360°)
- `distanceToDestination`: Distance to destination in miles
- `alignmentError`: Signed alignment error (+ = right of target, - = left)

**LocationManager (Session State - Non-Published)**
- `savedMapCamera`: Saved map camera position (lat, lng, zoom) for restoring map view state
- Persists across view recreations when switching between compass and map views
- Saved continuously as user pans/zooms the map via `GMSMapViewDelegate`

**LocationManager (Persistent State - UserDefaults)**
- `recentDestinations`: Saved to UserDefaults as JSON
- Automatically saved via `didSet` when array changes
- Loaded on app startup in `init()`
- Key: `"recentDestinations"`

**PlacesService (Session State)**
- `searchResults`: Array of Google Places autocomplete predictions

**View-Level State (`@State`)**
- `ContentView.showingMapView`: Boolean flag for compass/map view toggle
- `MapView.GoogleMapView.mapView`: Reference to the GMSMapView instance
- `MapView.GoogleMapView.hasSetInitialCamera`: Flag to prevent overwriting saved camera
- `SearchBar.isSearching`: Whether user is actively searching
- `SearchBar.isTextFieldFocused`: TextField focus state

**Persistence Strategy**
- **Persistent (survives app restarts)**: Recent destinations → UserDefaults
- **Session (survives view recreation)**: Map camera, navigation state → LocationManager properties
- **Local (view lifecycle)**: UI state, temporary flags → `@State` in views

### Configuration

The app requires a Google Maps API key stored in `Config.plist`:

```xml
<key>GMSApiKey</key>
<string>YOUR_API_KEY_HERE</string>
```

This key is used for both Google Maps and Google Places services.

### Permissions

The app requires the following iOS permissions:
- **Location Services (When In Use)**: For GPS positioning and compass heading

---

## Development Notes

### Architecture Principles

- **Separation of Concerns**: Models hold data, Services handle logic, Views display UI
- **Single Source of Truth**: `LocationManager` manages all location-related state
- **Reactive Updates**: SwiftUI automatically updates UI when `@Published` properties change
- **Minimal Dependencies**: Core iOS frameworks + Google Maps SDK only

### Future Enhancements

Potential areas for expansion:
- Path-tracking and storing, to see your travels in hindsight
- Pulses on waypoint placement for enhanced immersion and synchronization between digital map, hapto-visual feedback, and real-world placement

---
